For this article, we will define momentum and think about it in the following way.
Good things and bad things happen in streaks. Positive momentum occurs when good things happen consistently and regularly over a period of time. Negative momentum occurs when bad things happen consistently and regularly over a period of time. Momentum exists in the present but also persists in longer and shorter phases that can stretch for minutes, hours, days, or months. People and groups of people can have momentum. Likewise, machines and other human-made creations also have momentum.
As a data scientist, I develop metrics that capture momentum and use these metrics to make probabilistic predictions of the future.
Momentum in sports is a funny thing. You know it when you see it, but you can't predict when it will change, speed up or slow down.
Many argue that momentum does not exist.
https://www.espn.com/college-football/story/_/id/32910904/is-momentum-real-depth-investigation-sports-most-overused-term
I frankly don't get this. I don't see how anyone who is a sports fan or has played sports at any level can deny that momentum exists. Of course, it exists. Of course, you can gain momentum, and of course, you can lose momentum. Predicting when momentum will change is the tricky part. I don't see how that's possible. Also, momentum is not something an individual can control or turn on and off (although the great Mike Leach mentioned techniques to change negative momentum in the article referenced above, and if anyone could change momentum, it would be the late, great Coach Leach). Just because you can't control momentum does not mean you can not use it to make better decisions. That is what I do in this notebook. Using National Football League (NFL) data, I create a series of variables that capture the momentum between the teams playing. Then, I use these momentum variables to predict, with great accuracy, the likelihood of converting a 4th down conversion attempt. The great thing about the model I developed here is that it could be used in real time on the sideline. As long as they can capture the game's momentum, there is no reason a coach should not know with great accuracy the probability of converting a 4th down in the NFL.
I created this model shortly after Dan Campbell's controversial decision to "go for it" on 4th down against the 49ers in the NFC Championship game.
https://www.si.com/nfl/lions/news/dan-campell-explains-fourth-down-calls-49ers#:~:text=Campbell%20opted%20to%20keep%20Jared,Francisco%20scored%20on%20ensuing%20possessions.
According to the model, the odds of converting on fourth down at that moment were less than 15%. That is, there was an 85% chance of failing. Do you think Dan Campbell makes the same decision, armed with this information? I bet he takes the three points and keeps fighting on.
